Add information about how to add new languages to monaco (#24906)
microsoft/PowerToys: doc/devdocs/modules/FileExplorer/monaco/readme.md

# Developer Preview (Monaco)

Developer preview is based on [Microsoft's Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/) which is maintained by the Visual Studio Code team.

> ## Update monaco editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Update Monaco Editor
```

> 1. Download Monaco editor with npm: `npm i monaco-editor`.

Reviewer: I don't know what npm is? :)

> 2. Delete everything except the `min` folder (the minimised code).

Reviewer: Delete from where?

Author: From the downloaded files

3. Copy the `min` folder inside the [`monacoSRC`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSRC) folder.

> 4. Generate the JSON file (see section below)

Reviewer: Which step/line exactly?

> 3. Copy the `min` folder inside the [`monacoSRC`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSRC) folder.

Reviewer 2: What is the copy target?

Author: Oh you're right. This should be "into" and not "inside"

## Add a new language definition

> 1. Add the language definition (Written with [Monarch](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/monarch.html)) to the [`monacoSRC`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/customLanguages/) folder. The file should be formatted like this (change `idDefinition` to the name of your language):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Add the language definition (Written with [Monarch](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/monarch.html)) to the [`monacoSRC`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/customLanguages/) folder. The file should be formatted like in the example below. (Please change `idDefinition` to the name of your language.)
```

```javascript
export function idDefinition() {
    return {
        ...
    }
}
```

2. Add the following line to the [`monacoSpecialLanguages.js` file](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSpecialLanguages.js):

```javascript
import { idDefinition } from './customLanguages/file.js';
```

3. In the [`monacoSpecialLanguages.js` file](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSpecialLanguages.js) add the following line to the `registerAdditionalLanguages` function:

```javascript

> registerAdditionalNewLanguage("id", [".fileExtension"], idDefinition(), monaco)

Reviewer 2: What should the dev write into the id attribute?

Author: anything

```

4. Execute the steps described in the [Generate monaco_languages.json file](#generate-monaco_languagesjson-file) section.

## Add a new file extension to an existing language

1. In the [`monacoSpecialLanguages.js` file](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSpecialLanguages.js) add the following line to the `registerAdditionalLanguages` function:

```javascript

> registerAdditionalLanguage("oldIdExt", [".fileExtension"], "oldId", monaco)

Reviewer 2: For me it is not clear what oldIdExt or oldId means. Maybe It would be if I look into the code. Can we add some examples here and would that make sense?

```

2. Execute the steps described in the [Generate monaco_languages.json file](#generate-monaco_languagesjson-file) section.

## monaco_languages.json

[`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) contains all extensions and Id's for the supported languages of Monaco. The [`FileHandler`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/FileHandler.cs) class and the installer are using this file.

### Generate monaco_languages.json file

After you updated monaco editor or adding a new language you should update the [`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) file.

> You have to run the file on a local webserver!

Reviewer 2: How do I get the local webserver. Do I need to install and configure apache? Can you make exxamples of local webservers?

Author: Yes you can use apache. I don't think we should create recommondations for server software in our documentation.

1. Build monaco in debug mode.

> 2. Open [generateLanguagesJson.html](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/generateLanguagesJson.html) in a browser.

Reviewer 2: Why do I need to open the file if I have the webserver? How do I connect both?

Reviewer 2: But do I need to configure the webserver to open the file? For what do I need the webserver?

Author: There's no special config you have to do. 

You have to open the file over a webserver, because Monaco uses a way to include JavaScript files that is blocked by browsers when a file is open via the "file:///" protocol, which is the case when you just open the file locally.

Reviewer 2: So if it is as simple as it sounds it is okay for me. Maybe we should this point as warning to the docs.

# Developer Preview (Monaco)

Developer preview is based on [Microsoft's Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/) which is maintained by the Visual Studio Code team.

> ## Update Monaco Editor

Reviewer 3: We need this to be fully off NPM as part of the build

# Developer Preview (Monaco)

Developer preview is based on [Microsoft's Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/) which is maintained by the Visual Studio Code team.

## Update Monaco Editor

1. Download Monaco editor with [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/): `npm i monaco-editor`.
2. Delete everything except the `min` folder (the minimised code) from the downloaded files.
3. Copy the `min` folder into the [`monacoSRC`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSRC) folder.

> 4. Generate the JSON file as described in the [Generate monaco_languages.json file](#generate-monaco_languagesjson-file) section.

Reviewer 4: <img width="224" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/57057282/227154483-850a59c7-8b39-47d5-9d98-25b66873fe66.png">

This doesn't look very nice to me :) At least move `file` out of the link

```javascript
export function idDefinition() {
    return {
        ...
    }
}
```

2. Add the following line to the [`monacoSpecialLanguages.js` file](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSpecialLanguages.js):

```javascript
import { idDefinition } from './customLanguages/file.js';
```

3. In the [`monacoSpecialLanguages.js` file](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSpecialLanguages.js) add the following line to the `registerAdditionalLanguages` function:

```javascript
registerAdditionalNewLanguage("id", [".fileExtension"], idDefinition(), monaco)
```

  * The id can be anything. Recommended is one of the file extensions. For example "php" or "reg".

4. Execute the steps described in the [Generate monaco_languages.json file](#generate-monaco_languagesjson-file) section.

## Add a new file extension to an existing language

1. In the [`monacoSpecialLanguages.js` file](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSpecialLanguages.js) add the following line to the `registerAdditionalLanguages` function:

```javascript
registerAdditionalLanguage("id", [".fileExtension"], "oldId", monaco)
```

>   * If for instance you want to add more extensions to the php language set the id to `phpExt` and the oldId to `php`.

Reviewer 4: what is oldId? mention monaco_languages.json

2. Execute the steps described in the [Generate monaco_languages.json file](#generate-monaco_languagesjson-file) section.

## monaco_languages.json

> [`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) contains all extensions and Id's for the supported languages of Monaco. The [`FileHandler`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/FileHandler.cs) class and the installer are using this file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) contains all extensions and Id's for the languages supported by Monaco. The [`FileHandler`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/FileHandler.cs) class and the installer are using this file to register preview handlers for defined extensions.
```

### Generate monaco_languages.json file

> After you updated monaco editor or adding a new language you should update the [`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After updating Monaco Editor and/or adding a new language you should update the [`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) file.
```

Not sure about and/or though

> You have to run the file on a local webserver!

Reviewer 4: can we add some link to how to do this?

1. Build monaco in debug mode.
2. Open [generateLanguagesJson.html](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/generateLanguagesJson.html) in a browser over the webserver.

> 3. Replace the old JSON file.

Reviewer 4: I've never done this. Replace with what? generateLanguagesJson.html will generate new monaco_languages.json file?

Author: Yes generateLanguagesJson.htmlwill generate the file and then download the file onto your computer

Reviewer 4: some more details about that would be nice

# Developer Preview (Monaco)

Developer preview is based on [Microsoft's Monaco Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/) which is maintained by the Visual Studio Code team.

## Update Monaco Editor

> 1. Download Monaco editor with [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/): `npm i monaco-editor`.

Reviewer 2: Where should I enter the command?

2. Delete everything except the `min` folder (the minimised code) from the downloaded files.
3. Copy the `min` folder into the `/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSRC` folder of the PowerToys project.

> 4. Generate the JSON file as described in the [Generate monaco_languages.json file](#generate-monaco_languagesjson-file) section.

Author: Good idea for another PR

## Add a new language definition

> As an example on how to add a new language definition you can look at the [Pull Request that adds the REG language definition](https://github.com/microsoft/PowerToys/pull/17183).

Reviewer 3: this is a bit unclear looking at that PR what is needed.  it is touching files that i don't think are directly needed.  feels like more was done in that PR.

## Add a new file extension to an existing language

1. In the [`monacoSpecialLanguages.js` file](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monacoSpecialLanguages.js) add the following line to the `registerAdditionalLanguages` function (`oldId` is the id of the language you want to add the extension to. You can find these id's in the `monaco_languages.json` file)):

```javascript
registerAdditionalLanguage("id", [".fileExtension"], "oldId", monaco)
```

  * If for instance you want to add more extensions to the php language set the id to `phpExt` and the oldId to `php`.

2. Execute the steps described in the [Generate monaco_languages.json file](#generate-monaco_languagesjson-file) section.

## monaco_languages.json

[`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) contains all extensions and Id's for the languages supported by Monaco. The [`FileHandler`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/FileHandler.cs) class and the installer are using this file to register preview handlers for defined extensions.

> After updating Monaco Editor and/or adding a new language you should update the [`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) file.

Reviewer 3: make this into a number list.  Don't make the person guess on steps.  Do 1, 2, 3, 4 ....

Reviewer 3: this feels like one giant list.

> After you updated monaco editor or adding a new language you should update the [`monaco_languages.json`](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/monaco_languages.json) file.

Reviewer 2: If this isn't a guthub page bug this line is duplicated.

You have to run the file on a local webserver, as browsers will block certain needed features when running the file locally. This can for example be achieved by using the [Live Server](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ritwickdey.LiveServer) extension for Visual Studio Code: Open the file in Visual Studio Code and click on the "Go Live" button in the bottom right corner.

> 1. Build monaco in debug mode.

Reviewer 3: why debug?

2. Open [generateLanguagesJson.html](/src/modules/previewpane/MonacoPreviewHandler/generateLanguagesJson.html) in a browser over the webserver.

> 3. Replace the old JSON file.

Reviewer 2: Where do I find the new one?
